tidb-cloud: add TopRU user guide in TiDB Cloud Clinic (Premium) (#22760)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/premium/top-ru-in-clinic-premium.md

---

> title: TopRU views in Top SQL in TiDB Cloud Clinic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Top RU on TiDB Cloud Web Console for Premium&Essential
```

> summary: Learn how to use TopRU in TiDB Cloud Clinic to identify SQL statements and database users with high RU consumption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Learn how to use Top RU on TiDB Cloud Web Console to identify SQL statements and database users with high RU consumption.
```

---

> # TopRU views in Top SQL in TiDB Cloud Clinic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Top RU on TiDB Cloud Web Console for Premium&Essential
```

> TopRU is an SQL observability feature in the Top SQL page of TiDB Cloud Clinic. It ranks SQL workloads by request unit (RU) consumption to help you quickly identify SQL statements with high resource usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Top RU is an SQL observability feature on TiDB Cloud Web Console. It ranks SQL workloads by request unit (RU) consumption to help you quickly identify SQL statements with high resource usage.
```

> TopRU reuses the Top SQL collection and reporting pipeline, but extends the core metric from CPU to RU, and aggregates records by `(user, sql_digest, plan_digest)`. This helps you identify both high-cost SQL statements and the database users who continuously consume RU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Top RU reuses the Top SQL collection and reporting pipeline, but extends the core metric from CPU to RU, and aggregates records by `(user, sql_digest, plan_digest)`. This helps you identify both high-cost SQL statements and the database users who continuously consume RU.
```

> TopRU and Top SQL can coexist. Enabling TopRU does not change the existing CPU semantics of Top SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Feature overview

> TopRU answers the following questions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Top RU answers the following questions:
```

- Which SQL statements continuously consume high RU?
- Is an RU spike in a time range caused by a small set of users or SQL statements?

> - Why is resource consumption high even when CPU usage is not high?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> TopRU data comes from runtime RU statistics in SQL execution, so it can reflect near-real-time resource trends. To control overhead, TopRU applies `TopN` aggregation to users and SQL statements, and merges low-priority items instead of outputting a full per-statement stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Top RU data comes from runtime RU statistics in SQL execution, so it can reflect near-real-time resource trends. To control overhead, Top RU applies `TopN` aggregation to users and SQL statements, and merges low-priority items instead of outputting a full per-statement stream.
```

## Recommended scenarios

> TopRU is useful in the following scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Top RU is useful in the following scenarios:
```

- You need to locate high RU-consuming SQL in clusters with [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control-ru-groups.md) enabled.
- CPU usage is not the main bottleneck, but overall resource consumption is still high.
- You need user-level visibility to answer "who is consuming RU" instead of only "which SQL consumes CPU".
- You need to quickly identify major RU hotspots under high load and prioritize SQL optimization, resource group governance, or workload throttling.

> TopRU is not for the following scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Top RU is not for the following scenarios:
```

- Billing, reconciliation, or precise auditing.

> - Replacing slow query logs, `statements_summary`, or daily offline statistics from resource groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Replacing Slow Query, SQL Statement, or daily offline statistics from resource groups.
```

## Prerequisites

> Before using TopRU, make sure that all of the following conditions are met:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before using Top RU, make sure that all of the following conditions are met:
```
